---
layout: post
comments: true
---
about a year and a half ago i shared my [rules for interacting with people](http://archive.nicerhugs.com/2016/05/rules-for-interacting-with-people.html) which i've been thinking about again, lately. i'm pretty much always impressed with former me, and wonder why present me isn't all that much together like she was.

i've been hankering to explain them, so i'm just gon' do it. one rule at a time.

rule 1 (ask for what you want, and then be OK with not getting it) and rule 11 (request consent but don't push for it) are pretty much the same, but i like rule 1 better, and my newer more enlightened self has stricken rule 11 from the list. #11 is basically a dumbed down, no challenge way of saying #1. and by that i mean, rule 1 is up front consent requesting without leaving room for accidental manipulative consent bypass.

accidental manipulative consent bypass? dear god, did i just create that horrible phrase? it sounds super gross but the reality is i think everyone engages in this, _all the time_. in the long distance hiking community we call it yogi'ing - aka acting like yogi bear, aka stealing someone else's pic-in-ic basket. the rules for yogi'ing are, you _can't_ directly ask for what you want. so if you want someone to share their cheese with you, you must cleverly manipulate them into giving it to you, usually achieved by being a starving thru-hiker in the presence of an unsuspecting and super star-struck day-hiker meeting a bill bryson-esque adventurer irl for the first time. really you don't have to say much. you just kind of tell them how you haven't been to town in a few days and you're starving and it's so hot out and YES you're really hiking the _whole_ trail, and voila, you've got cheese, and probably also an offer to sleep on a couch and get a warm shower!

now that, honestly, is a fun game. but it's just that. a game. thru-hikers recognized it as such and oft have competitions to yogi the most goods out of  unsuspecting tourists at beautiful mountain vistas. games are fun when the participants know they're playing and consent to playing (sorry, all you duped day-hikers; i hope you can accept an apology and the memories of smelly hiker funk in exchange for you unwitting participation and all that cheese). games are not so fun when they're played with you against your will.

 yogi'ing differs from accidental manipulative consent bypass in that it is not accidental. it is, instead, very intentional in its manipulation. it's fun to set out an explicit challenge to try to get something without ever asking for it, but it's also kind of evil when it applies to things beyond cheese or grapes or a bottle of water. i'm really serious, tho, that we do this kind of thing without intending to with more frequency that we would like to admit. we _accidentally_ engage in manipulative behavior _all the time_. it's what complaining is. it's what fishing for compliments is. it's what "planting a seed" is. it's why people read into your behavior or think you mean something you didn't by a casual remark - they expect you're doing this to them! it's basically the comfortable way, and honestly, the socially acceptable way, of trying to get what we want, without having to explicitly ask for it.

manipulative behavior is so common that i almost always give it the 'accidental' pass. most of our models for interacting with others suggest that directly asking for what you want is bad: it exposes your desires, it makes you vulnerable to rejection, it is too forward, it is rude, etc. that's part of why asking for consent is so difficult. but you don't have to ask for what you want if you can manipulate your way to someone else offering it first. it's easy to just bypass asking for consent altogether and _still get what you want_ if you're just being a normal human.

i don't really stand for that. if i'm going to get or give consent, it expect it to be explicit. i'm certainly not perfect at that. that's why i wrote a rule to remind myself of it. it takes a lot of courage and vulnerability to figure out what we really want, and then ask for it, directly, without pretense, without hinting and testing waters, without any manipulation at all. it takes a lot of courage and vulnerability to accept 'no' when the request isn't met. but then, at least you know when you get what you want, that you've got it for real. that it was given in full knowledge, with full consent. that it was given on purpose, and not on accident.
