---
layout: post
comments: true
---
some additional thoughts about rule #1, ask for what you want and be ok with not getting it. suffice to say that not everyone follows this rule. not everyone puts effort into creating real, honest communication, and even when you work at it sometimes you'll falter.

first, i want to reiterate that is is _difficult_ to ask for what you want. period. not everyone is comfortable with this level of communication, and embracing that discomfort is a brave and scary thing to do. it's entirely possible that asking for what you want will cause you to confront awkwardness, anger, rejection - sometimes even the death of a friendship or relationship. despite this, i still hold firm to its importance and march ever forward. if someone else doesn't want full on scary honesty, that's ok. it's everyone's right to make (or not make, and thereby make) the decisions that guide their life, including how and to whom they communicate.

it's inevitable of asking for what you want directly that you can (and will) be confronted with others' reactions (or lack thereof). people might fear causing pain, might not trust that you'll accept their decline, might be scared of being honest themselves, or have any number of other reasons for not responding with their best self. your requests may be returned with laughter, anger, direct rejection, or even nothing at all. navigating responses to honesty requires as much presence and self awareness as asking for what you want in the first place. making it a part of the rule that you must be "ok" with rejection makes this rule _incredibly_ hard to follow.

there is no external reward for behaving in this way. there is no guarantee that others will see your honesty as good, or pat you on the back for your ability to accept rejection with apparent ease. honesty is no more likely to get you what you want than the accidental manipulation i spoke of before, and in fact it will cause you to directly confront rejection far more frequently if you truly put it into practice. the expectation that we even get a response at all may never be met, let alone that the response is the one we want.

despite all these apparent negatives, i really believe that this rule is the first and most foundational rule of good communication, and therefore good relationships. asking for what you want requires that you _know_ what you want, and that you are your authentic self when you present to others. the greater opportunities for intimacy this affords far outweigh the discomforts. over time the relationships that flourish with this standard of communication will prove themselves more valuable than the ones that crumble under fears of vulnerability. in short, if your friends can't handle honesty, keep being honest until you find those who can - you'll be better off.

and while being rejected never feels good, facing rejection directly is an excellent teacher in humility. it's a a great time to practice patience and compassion with yourself, get to know yourself better, and remember that we cannot control anything but our own behaviors. accepting that we do not always get what we want is a lifelong journey.
